Introduction
Digital and social media have become a major
source of political news dissemination (Hermida
et al., 2012; Kümpel et al., 2015; Hermida, 2016)
with unprecedentedly high user engagement rates
(Mustafaraj and Metaxas, 2011; Velasquez, 2012;
Garimella et al., 2018). The volume of online
discourse surrounding polarizing issues—climate
change, gun control, abortion, wage gaps, death
penalty, taxes, same-sex marriage, and more—has
been drastically growing in the past decade (Valen-
zuela et al., 2012; Rainie et al., 2012; Enikolopov
et al., 2019). While online political engagement
1Code and data are publicly available at https://github.
com/BunsenFeng/PoliLean.
promotes democratic values and diversity of per-
spectives, these discussions also reflect and rein-
force societal biases—stereotypical generalizations
about people or social groups (Devine, 1989; Bargh,
1999; Blair, 2002). Such language constitutes a ma-
jor portion of large language models’ (LMs) pre-
training data, propagating biases into downstream
models.
Hundreds of studies have highlighted ethical is-
sues in NLP models (Blodgett et al., 2020a; Field
et al., 2021; Kumar et al., 2022) and designed syn-
thetic datasets (Nangia et al., 2020; Nadeem et al.,
2021) or controlled experiments to measure how
biases in language are encoded in learned represen-
tations (Sun et al., 2019), and how annotator errors
in training data are liable to increase unfairness
of NLP models (Sap et al., 2019). However, the
language of polarizing political issues is particu-
larly complex (Demszky et al., 2019), and social
biases hidden in language can rarely be reduced to
pre-specified stereotypical associations (Joseph and
Morgan, 2020). To the best of our knowledge, no
prior work has shown how to analyze the effects of
naturally occurring media biases in pretraining data
on language models, and subsequently on down-
stream tasks, and how it affects the fairness towards
diverse social groups. Our study aims to fill this
gap.
As a case study, we focus on the effects of media
biases in pretraining data on the fairness of hate
speech detection with respect to diverse social at-
tributes, such as gender, race, ethnicity, religion,
and sexual orientation, and of misinformation de-
tection with respect to partisan leanings. We investi-
gate how media biases in the pretraining data prop-
agate into LMs and ultimately affect downstream
tasks, because discussions about polarizing social
and economic issues are abundant in pretraining
data sourced from news, forums, books, and online
encyclopedias, and this language inevitably perpet-
uates social stereotypes. We choose hate speech
arXiv:2305.08283v3  [cs.CL]  6 Jul 2023
and misinformation classification because these are
social-oriented tasks in which unfair predictions
can be especially harmful (Duggan, 2017; League,
2019, 2021).
To this end, grounded in political spectrum the-
ories (Eysenck, 1957; Rokeach, 1973; Gindler,
2021) and the political compass test,2 we propose
to empirically quantify the political leaning of pre-
trained LMs (§2). We then further pretrain language
models on different partisan corpora to investigate
whether LMs pick up political biases from training
data. Finally, we train classifiers on top of LMs
with varying political leanings and evaluate their
performance on hate speech instances targeting dif-
ferent identity groups (Yoder et al., 2022), and on
misinformation detection with different agendas
(Wang, 2017). In this way, we investigate the prop-
agation of political bias through the entire pipeline
from pretraining data to language models to down-
stream tasks.
Our experiments across several data domains,
partisan news datasets, and LM architectures (§3)
demonstrate that different pretrained LMs do have
different underlying political leanings, reinforc-
ing the political polarization present in pretraining
corpora (§4.1). Further, while the overall perfor-
mance of hate speech and misinformation detectors
remains consistent across such politically-biased
LMs, these models exhibit significantly different
behaviors against different identity groups and par-
tisan media sources. (§4.2).
The main contributions of this paper are novel
methods to quantify political biases in LMs, and
findings that shed new light on how ideological
polarization in pretraining corpora propagates bi-
ases into language models, and subsequently into
social-oriented downstream tasks. In §5, we discuss
implications of our findings for NLP research, that
no language model can be entirely free from social
biases, and propose future directions to mitigate
unfairness.
2
