Conclusion
We employ the edge probing task suite to explore
how the different layers of the BERT network can
resolve syntactic and semantic structure within a
sentence. We present two complementary mea-
surements: scalar mixing weights, learned from a
training corpus, and cumulative scoring, measured
on an evaluation set, and show that a consistent
ordering emerges. We ﬁnd that while this tradi-
tional pipeline order holds in the aggregate, on in-
dividual examples the network can resolve out-of-
order, using high-level information like predicate-
argument relations to help disambiguate low-level
decisions like part-of-speech. This provides new
evidence corroborating that deep language mod-
els can represent the types of syntactic and se-
mantic abstractions traditionally believed neces-
sary for language processing, and moreover that
they can model complex interactions between dif-
ferent levels of hierarchical information.
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Kenton Lee, Emily Pitler, and Jon Clark
for helpful comments and feedback, and to the
members of the Google AI Language team for
many productive discussions.
References
Yonatan Belinkov. 2018. On internal language repre-
sentations in deep learning: An analysis of machine
translation and speech recognition.
Ph.D. thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Terra Blevins, Omer Levy, and Luke Zettlemoyer.
2018. Deep RNNs encode soft hierarchical syntax.
In Proceedings of ACL.
Alexis Conneau,
Germ´an Kruszewski,
Guillaume
Lample, Lo¨ıc Barrault, and Marco Baroni. 2018.
What you can cram into a single $&#* vector: Prob-
ing sentence embeddings for linguistic properties.
In Proceedings of ACL.
Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and
Kristina Toutanova. 2019.
BERT: Pre-training of
deep bidirectional transformers for language under-
standing. In Proceedings of NAACL.
Iris Hendrickx, Su Nam Kim, Zornitsa Kozareva,
Preslav Nakov, Diarmuid ´O S´eaghdha, Sebastian
Pad´o, Marco Pennacchiotti, Lorenza Romano, and
Stan Szpakowicz. 2009.
Semeval-2010 task 8:
Multi-way classiﬁcation of semantic relations be-
tween pairs of nominals.
In Proceedings of
the Workshop on Semantic Evaluations:
Recent
Achievements and Future Directions.
Xiaodong Liu, Pengcheng He, Weizhu Chen, and Jian-
feng Gao. 2019. Multi-task deep neural networks
for natural language understanding. arXiv preprint
1901.11504.
Christopher Manning, Mihai Surdeanu, John Bauer,
Jenny Finkel, Steven Bethard, and David McClosky.
2014. The Stanford CoreNLP natural language pro-
cessing toolkit.
In Proceedings of ACL: System
Demonstrations.
Rebecca Marvin and Tal Linzen. 2018. Targeted syn-
tactic evaluation of language models. In Proceed-
ings of EMNLP.
Tomas Mikolov, Ilya Sutskever, Kai Chen, Greg S. Cor-
rado, and Jeff Dean. 2013. Distributed representa-
tions of words and phrases and their compositional-
ity. In Proceedings of NIPS.
Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Mohit Iyyer, Matt
Gardner, Christopher Clark, Kenton Lee, and Luke
Zettlemoyer. 2018a. Deep contextualized word rep-
resentations. In Proceedings of NAACL.
Matthew Peters, Mark Neumann, Luke Zettlemoyer,
and Wen-tau Yih. 2018b.
Dissecting contextual
word embeddings: Architecture and representation.
In Proceedings of EMNLP.
Adam Poliak, Aparajita Haldar, Rachel Rudinger,
J. Edward Hu, Ellie Pavlick, Aaron Steven White,
and Benjamin Van Durme. 2018.
Collecting di-
verse natural language inference problems for sen-
tence representation evaluation. In Proceedings of
EMNLP.
Alec Radford, Karthik Narasimhan, Tim Salimans,
and
Ilya
Sutskever.
2018.
Improving
lan-
guage understanding by generative pre-training.
https://blog.openai.com/language-unsupervised.
Alec Radford, Jeffrey Wu, Rewon Child, David Luan,
Dario Amodei, and Ilya Sutskever. 2019.
Lan-
guage models are unsupervised multitask learners.
https://blog.openai.com/better-language-models.
Drew Reisinger, Rachel Rudinger, Francis Ferraro,
Craig Harman, Kyle Rawlins, and Benjamin Van
Durme. 2015. Semantic proto-roles. Transactions
of the Association of Computational Linguistics.
Xing Shi, Inkit Padhi, and Kevin Knight. 2016. Does
string-based neural MT learn source syntax? In Pro-
ceedings of EMNLP.
Natalia Silveira,
Timothy Dozat,
Marie-Catherine
de Marneffe, Samuel Bowman, Miriam Connor,
John Bauer, and Christopher D. Manning. 2014. A
gold standard dependency corpus for English.
In
Proceedings of the Ninth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation.
Adam Teichert, Adam Poliak, Benjamin Van Durme,
and Matthew Gormley. 2017. Semantic proto-role
labeling. In Proceedings of AAAI.
Ian Tenney, Patrick Xia, Berlin Chen, Alex Wang,
Adam Poliak, R Thomas McCoy, Najoung Kim,
Benjamin Van Durme, Sam Bowman, Dipanjan Das,
and Ellie Pavlick. 2019. What do you learn from
context? probing for sentence structure in contextu-
alized word representations. In International Con-
ference on Learning Representations.
Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob
Uszkoreit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz
Kaiser, and Illia Polosukhin. 2017. Attention is all
you need. In Proceedings of NIPS.
Ralph Weischedel, Martha Palmer, Mitchell Marcus,
Eduard Hovy, Sameer Pradhan, Lance Ramshaw,
Nianwen Xue, Ann Taylor, Jeff Kaufman, Michelle
Franchini,
et
al.
2013.
OntoNotes
release
5.0 LDC2013T19.
Linguistic Data Consortium,
Philadelphia, PA.
A
Appendix
A.1
Comparison of Encoders
We reproduce Figure 1 and Figure 2 (which depict
metrics on BERT-large) from the main paper be-
low, and show analogous plots for the BERT-base
models. We observe that the most important layers
for a given task appear in roughly the same relative
position on both the 24-layer BERT-large and 12-
layer BERT-base models, and that tasks generally
appear in the same order.
Additionally, in Figure A.1 we show scalar mix-
ing weights for the ELMo encoder (Peters et al.,
2018a), which consists of two LSTM layers over a
per-word character CNN. We observe that the ﬁrst
LSTM layer (layer 1) is most informative for all
tasks, which corroborates the observations of Fig-
ure 2 of Peters et al. (2018a). As with BERT, we
observe that the weights are only weakly concen-
trated for the relations and SPR tasks. However,
unlike BERT, we see only a weak concentration in
the weights on the coreference task, which agrees
with the ﬁnding of Tenney et al. (2019) that ELMo
presents only weak features for coreference.
A.2
Additional Examples
We provide additional examples in the style of
Figure 3, which illustrate sequential decisions in
the layers of the BERT-base model.
Figure A.1: Scalar mixing weights for the ELMo en-
coder. Layer 0 is the character CNN that produces per-
word representations, and layers 1 and 2 are the LSTM
layers.
(a) BERT-base
(b) BERT-large
Figure A.2: Summary statistics on BERT-base (left) and BERT-large (right). Columns on left show F1 dev-set
scores for the baseline (P (0)
τ
) and full-model (P (L)
τ
) probes. Dark (blue) are the mixing weight center of gravity;
light (purple) are the expected layer from the cumulative scores.
(a) BERT-base
(b) BERT-large
Figure A.3: Layer-wise metrics on BERT-base (left) and BERT-large (right). Solid (blue) are mixing weights s(ℓ)
τ ;
outlined (purple) are differential scores ∆(ℓ)
τ , normalized for each task. Horizontal axis is encoder layer.
Figure A.4: Trace of selected annotations that intersect
the token “basque” in the above sentence. We see the
model recognize this as part of a proper noun (NNP)
in layer 2, which leads it to revise its hypothesis about
the constituent “petro basque” from an ordinary noun
phrase (NP) to a nominal mention (NML) in layers 3-4.
We also see that from layer 3 onwards, the model rec-
ognizes “petro basque” as either an organization (ORG)
or a national or religious group (NORP), but does not
strongly disambiguate between the two.
Figure A.5: Trace of selected annotations that intersect
the second “today” in the above sentence. The odel ini-
tially believes this to be a date and a common noun, but
by layer 4 realizes that this is the TV show (entity tag
WORK OF ART) and subsequently revises its hypothe-
ses about the constituent type and part-of-speech.
Figure A.6: Trace of selected coreference annotations
on the above sentence. Not shown are two coreference
edges that the model has correctly resolved at layer
0 (guessing from embeddings alone): “him” and “the
hurt man” are coreferent, as are “he” and “he”. We see
that the remaining edges, between non-coreferent men-
tions, are resolved in several stages.
Figure A.7: Trace of selected coreference and SRL an-
notations on the above sentence. The model resolves
the semantic role (purpose, ARGM-PRP) of the phrase
“to help him” in layers 5-7, then quickly resolves at
layer 8 that “him” and “he” (the agent of “stop”) are
not coreferent. Also shown is the correct prediction
that “him” is the recipient (ARG1, patient) of “help”.

