Introduction
Pre-trained sentence encoders such as ELMo (Pe-
ters et al., 2018a) and BERT (Devlin et al., 2019)
have rapidly improved the state of the art on many
NLP tasks, and seem poised to displace both static
word embeddings (Mikolov et al., 2013) and dis-
crete pipelines (Manning et al., 2014) as the basis
for natural language processing systems. While
this has been a boon for performance, it has come
at the cost of interpretability, and it remains un-
clear whether such models are in fact learning the
kind of abstractions that we intuitively believe are
important for representing natural language, or are
simply modeling complex co-occurrence statis-
tics.
A wave of recent work has begun to “probe”
state-of-the-art models to understand whether they
are representing language in a satisfying way.
Much of this work is behavior-based, designing
controlled test sets and analyzing errors in order
to reverse-engineer the types of abstractions the
model may or may not be representing (e.g. Con-
neau et al., 2018; Marvin and Linzen, 2018; Poliak
et al., 2018). Parallel efforts inspect the structure
of the network directly, to assess whether there
exist localizable regions associated with distinct
types of linguistic decisions. Such work has pro-
duced evidence that deep language models can en-
code a range of syntactic and semantic informa-
tion (e.g. Shi et al., 2016; Belinkov, 2018; Ten-
ney et al., 2019), and that more complex structures
are represented hierarchically in the higher layers
of the model (Peters et al., 2018b; Blevins et al.,
2018).
We build on this latter line of work, focusing
on the BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019), and use
a suite of probing tasks (Tenney et al., 2019) de-
rived from the traditional NLP pipeline to quantify
where speciﬁc types of linguistic information are
encoded. Building on observations (Peters et al.,
2018b) that lower layers of a language model en-
code more local syntax while higher layers capture
more complex semantics, we present two novel
contributions. First, we present an analysis that
spans the common components of a traditional
NLP pipeline. We show that the order in which
speciﬁc abstractions are encoded reﬂects the tradi-
tional hierarchy of these tasks. Second, we quali-
tatively analyze how individual sentences are pro-
cessed by the BERT network, layer-by-layer. We
show that while the pipeline order holds in ag-
gregate, the model can allow individual decisions
to depend on each other in arbitrary ways, de-
ferring ambiguous decisions or revising incorrect
ones based on higher-level information.
2
Model
Edge Probing.
Our experiments are based on
the “edge probing” approach of Tenney et al.
(2019), which aims to measure how well infor-
mation about linguistic structure can be extracted
from a pre-trained encoder. Edge probing decom-
poses structured-prediction tasks into a common
arXiv:1905.05950v2  [cs.CL]  9 Aug 2019
format, where a probing classiﬁer receives spans
s1 = [i1, j1) and (optionally) s2 = [i2, j2) and
must predict a label such as a constituent or rela-
tion type.1 The probing classiﬁer has access only
to the per-token contextual vectors within the tar-
get spans, and so must rely on the encoder to pro-
vide information about the relation between these
spans and their role in the sentence.
We use eight labeling tasks from the edge
probing suite: part-of-speech (POS), constituents
(Consts.), dependencies (Deps.), entities, seman-
tic role labeling (SRL), coreference (Coref.), se-
mantic proto-roles (SPR; Reisinger et al., 2015),
and relation classiﬁcation (SemEval). These tasks
are derived from standard benchmark datasets, and
evaluated with a common metric–micro-averaged
F1–to facilitate comparison across tasks. 2
BERT.
The BERT model (Devlin et al., 2019)
has shown state-of-the-art performance on many
tasks,
and its deep Transformer architecture
(Vaswani et al., 2017) is typical of many recent
models (e.g. Radford et al., 2018, 2019; Liu et al.,
2019).
We focus on the stock BERT models
(base and large, uncased), which are trained with
a multi-task objective (masked language modeling
and next-sentence prediction) over a 3.3B word
English corpus. Since we want to understand how
the network represents language as a result of pre-
training, we follow Tenney et al. (2019) (depart-
ing from standard BERT usage) and freeze the en-
coder weights. This prevents the encoder from re-
arranging its internal representations to better suit
the probing task.
Given input tokens T
=
[t0, t1, . . . , tn],
a deep encoder produces a set of layer ac-
tivations H(0), H(1), . . . , H(L), where H(ℓ)
=
[h(ℓ)
0 , h(ℓ)
1 , . . . , h(ℓ)
n ] are the activation vectors of
the ℓth encoder layer and H(0) corresponds to the
non-contextual word(piece) embeddings. We use
a weighted sum across layers (§3.1) to pool these
into a single set of per-token representation vec-
tors H = [h0, h1, . . . , hn], and train a probing
classiﬁer Pτ for each task using the architecture
and procedure of Tenney et al. (2019).
1For single-span tasks (POS, entities, and constituents),
s2 is not used. For POS, s1 = [i, i + 1) is a single token.
2We use the code from https://github.com/
jsalt18-sentence-repl/jiant.
Dependencies is
the English Web Treebank (Silveira et al., 2014), SPR is the
SPR1 dataset of (Teichert et al., 2017), and relations is Se-
mEval 2010 Task 8 (Hendrickx et al., 2009). All other tasks
are from OntoNotes 5.0 (Weischedel et al., 2013).
Limitations
This work is intended to be ex-
ploratory. We focus on one particular encoder–
BERT–to explore how information can be orga-
nized in a deep language model, and further work
is required to determine to what extent the trends
hold in general.
Furthermore, our work carries
the limitations of all inspection-based probing: the
fact that a linguistic pattern is not observed by our
probing classiﬁer does not guarantee that it is not
there, and the observation of a pattern does not
tell us how it is used. For this reason, we empha-
size the importance of combining structural analy-
sis with behavioral studies (as discussed in § 1) to
provide a more complete picture of what informa-
tion these models encode and how that informa-
tion affects performance on downstream tasks.
3
Metrics
We deﬁne two complementary metrics. The ﬁrst,
scalar mixing weights (§3.1) tell us which lay-
ers, in combination, are most relevant when a
probing classiﬁer has access to the whole BERT
model. The second, cumulative scoring (§3.2) tells
us how much higher we can score on a probing
task with the introduction of each layer. These
metrics provide complementary views on what is
happening inside the model. Mixing weights are
learned solely from the training data–they tell us
which layers the probing model ﬁnds most useful.
In contrast, cumulative scoring is derived entirely
from an evaluation set, and tell us how many lay-
ers are needed for a correct prediction.
3.1
Scalar Mixing Weights
To pool across layers, we use the scalar mixing
technique introduced by the ELMo model. Fol-
lowing Equation (1) of Peters et al. (2018a), for
each task we introduce scalar parameters γτ and
a(0)
τ , a(1)
τ , . . . , a(L)
τ
, and let:
hi,τ = γτ
L
X
ℓ=0
s(ℓ)
τ h(ℓ)
i
(1)
where sτ = softmax(aτ). We learn these weights
jointly with the probing classiﬁer Pτ, in order to
allow it to extract information from the many lay-
ers of an encoder without adding a large number
of parameters. After the probing model is trained,
we extract the learned coefﬁcients in order to es-
timate the contribution of different layers to that
particular task. We interpret higher weights as ev-
Figure 1: Summary statistics on BERT-large. Columns
on left show F1 dev-set scores for the baseline (P (0)
τ
)
and full-model (P (L)
τ
) probes. Dark (blue) are the mix-
ing weight center of gravity (Eq. 2); light (purple) are
the expected layer from the cumulative scores (Eq. 4).
idence that the corresponding layer contains more
information related to that particular task.
Center-of-Gravity.
As a summary statistic, we
deﬁne the mixing weight center of gravity as:
¯Es[ℓ] =
L
X
ℓ=0
ℓ· s(ℓ)
τ
(2)
This reﬂects the average layer attended to for each
task; intuitively, we can interpret a higher value to
mean that the information needed for that task is
captured by higher layers.
3.2
Cumulative Scoring
We would like to estimate at which layer in the
encoder a target (s1, s2, label) can be correctly
predicted. Mixing weights cannot tell us this di-
rectly, because they are learned as parameters and
do not correspond to a distribution over data. A
naive classiﬁer at a single layer cannot either, be-
cause information about a particular span may be
spread out across several layers, and as observed
in Peters et al. (2018b) the encoder may choose to
discard information at higher layers.
To address this, we train a series of classiﬁers
{P (ℓ)
τ }ℓwhich use scalar mixing (Eq. 1) to attend
to layer ℓas well as all previous layers. P (0)
τ
corre-
sponds to a non-contextual baseline that uses only
a bag of word(piece) embeddings, while P (L)
τ
=
Pτ corresponds to probing all layers of the BERT
model.
These classiﬁers are cumulative, in the sense
that P (ℓ+1)
τ
has a similar number of parameters but
with access to strictly more information than P (ℓ)
τ ,
Figure 2: Layer-wise metrics on BERT-large. Solid
(blue) are mixing weights s(ℓ)
τ
(§3.1); outlined (purple)
are differential scores ∆(ℓ)
τ
(§3.2), normalized for each
task. Horizontal axis is encoder layer.
and we see intuitively that performance (F1 score)
generally increases as more layers are added.3 We
can then compute a differential score ∆(ℓ)
τ , which
measures how much better we do on the probing
task if we observe one additional encoder layer ℓ:
∆(ℓ)
τ
= Score(P (ℓ)
τ ) −Score(P (ℓ−1)
τ
)
(3)
Expected
Layer.
Again,
we
compute
a
(pseudo)4 expectation over the differential scores
as a summary statistic. To focus on the behavior
of the contextual encoder layers, we omit the con-
tribution of both the “trivial” examples resolved at
layer 0, as well as the remaining headroom from
3Note that if a new layer provides distracting features, the
probing model can overﬁt and performance can drop. We see
this in particular in the last 1-2 layers (Figure 2).
4This is not a true expectation because the F1 score is not
an expectation over examples.
the full model. Let:
¯E∆[ℓ] =
PL
ℓ=1 ℓ· ∆(ℓ)
τ
PL
ℓ=1 ∆(ℓ)
τ
(4)
This can be thought of as, approximately, the ex-
pected layer at which the probing model correctly
labels an example, assuming that example is re-
solved at some layer ℓ≥1 of the encoder.
4
